A muscle cramp is a sudden
and involuntary contraction
of one or more muscles.
These cramps, also called
charley horses or muscle spasms,
are usually the result of straining
or overusing a muscle.
They can be very painful
and may last a few seconds
to several minutes.
Muscle cramps are also common
at night during sleep,
especially in leg muscles.
If you tend to get cramps at night,
stretching before bed can be helpful.
Gently massaging the cramped muscle
until the cramping stops can help relieve pain.
You might also feel or see a hard
lump of muscle tissue beneath your skin.
Dehydration or low electrolyte levels
are a common cause of muscle cramps.
Drink plenty of water
before and during exercise.
Muscle cramps can also be
more frequent as you age.
Over time, losing muscle mass
as you get older can put
more strain on your muscles.
Often, women who are pregnant
experience leg cramps due to low electrolyte levels,
circulation changes,
and pressure on the nerves
caused by the growing baby.
Muscle cramps usually resolve on their own
and are rarely serious enough
to require medical care.
However, see your doctor if your cramps:
Don’t improve with self-care
Are associated with leg swelling, redness or skin changes
Are associated with muscle weakness
Staying hydrated,
eating a healthy diet,
especially foods rich in calcium,
potassium and magnesium,
and stretching regularly
are the best ways to prevent muscle cramps.